attention on us University campuses is
rising after police arrested hundreds of
pro Palestinian student demonstrators
students at dozens of colleges in the US
have been demonstrating against the war
in Gaza they've been calling on
administrators to divest from companies
that allegedly profit from Israel's war
against Hamas there was violence
overnight at the University of
California in Los Angeles where pro
Israel demonstrators attacked a camps
set up by Pro Palestinian students they
attempt Ed to pull down barricades
protecting the camp and there were
scuffles between the two sides police
later moved in to separate the two
groups and to stop the unrest the
university canceled all classes on
Wednesday because of the
violence and in New York City Police
cleared an occupied building and
arrested 300 Pro Palestinian protesters
on the campus of Colombia University
overnight bringing a dayong standoff to
a dramatic end fellow demonstrators have
now taken their protest to outside New
York Police Headquarters many criticized
the way officer bro officers broke up
what they said was a peaceful protest
and saying police were rough with
demonstrators New York mayor Eric Adams
has defended the decision saying the
protests were escalated by outside
figures not affiliated with the
university there were individuals on the
campus should not have been there there
were people who are
professionals and we saw evidence of
training we saw a shift in tactics that
were being used and when you start using
the intelligence that intel was able to
supply we knew it was time to
communicate directly with the school and
say you have more than a peaceful
protest on your
hand let's join our correspondent
Benjamin Alvarez Gruber who's in New
York City near Columbia University
Welcome uh Ben so what's the the latest
on this day after this police raid
there were a group of protesters earlier
today in front of this entrance that
quite close to the hall that was
occupied by the students and where NYPD
New York police entered with a lot of
Law Enforcement Officers late evening
yesterday now the situation is calm the
big question of course will be what will
happen with the students more than 100
students were arrested that were colum
University and also another University
here in New York bringing the number of
arrests to 282 the big question will be
now if they will face expulsion as the
university has said and what will
continue to happen we only got one email
from the presidency of Columbia
University today saying that there's no
media access to campus it has made it
quite difficult also to do this coverage
and they also said that Hamilton Hall
that he is here right behind me is an
active crime team by NYPD so we're still
waiting for confirmation on that side
and who was the New York mayor Eric
Adams talking about when he blamed
external actors and Professionals for
the escalation on the Columbia
campus that's a good question that many
also students here are asking themselves
because NYPD has not released the
information of how many of those who
were arrested are part of the university
community and how many are not part of
the university community and also what
they said that had a chain during a
press conference saying that it shows
how professional these protests are but
at the end it turned out that there was
just a a bike lock that was used and
that was also promoted by University
that many students have here so there is
a lack of information there even the
student journalists who have been
covering this over the past couple of
days as this has been involing have not
been granted access Only Yesterday
essential staff and those who are living
inside of Campus have been able to enter
and the only response that we got also
to ask if we will get an official
statement if we will be able to talk to
a spokesperson of the University was not
today will try again tomorrow and for
more on that we're now joined by Robert
con he's a professor of social studies
education at New York University n uh
NYU uh Professor you called this current
wave of protest the biggest student
movement of the 21st century in the US
what sparked
this uh concern about the uh escalation
of the war in Gaza and the use of
American Military uh aid for uh this for
the war and the all the deaths of
civilians I think uh particularly with
social media students have found out
about this very quickly and they're very
concerned about the use of American
military aid uh for for bombing and
killing of civilians you know the images
of children that are dying and I think
that's the main reason why this this
burst out and then the administration's
responses initially to nonviolent
protests uh you know clamping down and
and getting pressure from Congress and
donors uh on administrations of colleges
to shut these down that like the initial
Colombia arrest before the building
occupation that that was uh really
helped to publicize this and to bring
this to the further to the attention of
students across the country and this has
been spreading across the country like
wildfire now there are Wars and
injustices and civilian casualties in
several places uh around the world some
of these wars are being fought with us
and other Western weapons and some of
them are longlasting why is it that the
current conflict in Gaza in
such outrage Among Us
students well I think it's because of
the you know the fact that so many
civilians have been dying and has very
been very much uh out there on uh in the
news media and in social media I think
that feeling of and by the way also
remember there was a sort of a smaller
Pro Palestinian Sol movement the
students for justice for Palestine has
been on college campus since since the
1990s it didn't really get much traction
Beyond a small group what really U um um
really had it explode was this war and
and the civilian deaths in a way you
could say in a parallel way to the' 60s
where you know Bull Connor the racist
police sheriff when he when he attacked
MLK and the uh the anti the anti-racist
protest in Birmingham you know with
police dogs and fire hoses I Netanyahu
is kind of that kind of figure in terms
of people's public perception and I
think that uh the best organizer that
these protests have had is Benjamin
Netanyahu inadvertently so but that's
nonetheless
now there also have been anti-semitic
undertones and expressions of solidarity
with extremist
organizations uh should that be
worrying oh yeah I think it's worrying
and I think people who engage in such
bigoted Behavior should be held
accountable but there has been a kind of
a an attempt to to smear the entire
movement that is to say that all these
protests are are are hateful and U um
anti-semitic and and that's just not
true I mean here in NYU are the
protesters who are arrested non for
non-violently occupying a Plaza in front
of the uh the business school uh they
had just had their Passover seder when
the arrest were happening so to say that
they're you know anti-semitic and yet
they have Jewish student activists and
they in here they're having a Seder is a
bit you know it's it just doesn't add up
that's not to deny that there has been a
problem with anti-Semitism but I think
that's more of a kind of Fringe piece of
this that you know needs again any of
those acts uh and slurs and Slanders and
certainly physical assaults uh people
should be held accountable and and you
know with due process punished if
they're guilty of that but I think the
attempt of people in Congress and the
donors to say these protests all have to
be even if they're non-violent and
non-disruptive have to be suppressed
that's a kind of authoritarian response
and I think using the anti-Semitism
issue in a way that's that's really not
accurate and it's just a way of sort of
suppressing something that we don't like
and on a University campus where you're
supposed to have the free exchange of
ideas that's a really bad model and what
in turn that's happened
is you know the speaker of the house I
don't know if you if you recall this
went to col Columbia University with a
delegation of congressmen saying
Congress Congressional Representatives
saying the president of Columbia should
resign because as if she hadn't been
tough enough and and so even though they
arrested over 100 demonstrators and so
what you get here is a a cycle of
escalation and that's how you got what I
think was a really unwise and really
tragic uh takeover administration
building of the damage University
property that wasn't happening initially
and I think the other thing I want to
say universities one of the problems is
they're not governed
democratically uh we may not the
universities may not probably won't want
to devest their Holdings uh their
connections to Israel but you could have
a democratic process where even though
on private University students are not
on the Board of Trustees they get to
make their case they get to be heard
even if the trustees are going to say no
they at least get a hearing and at Brown
University that method was used and the
protest ended in other words the
university didn't say we're the bestest
they just said okay you know do a
presentation of it we'll listen to you
and we'll decide so there is a way to
deescalate this and unfortunately that
didn't happen to Colombia because I
think a very inexperienced uh president
who didn't really know how to handle
these
protests well let's take a look at the
potential National significance of these
protests we're joined by David Faber
who's a professor of modern US history
at the University of campus thank you so
much for joining us on the day Professor
let's start with the comparisons being
made between uh these Pro tests and
those against the Vietnam War back in
the 60s do you think those comparisons
are
valid well there's certainly a a degree
of similarity uh deja vu all over again
I think there's one major difference
that I've been really struck by you can
think about the anti-war protest in the
1960s as being incremental when on for
several years started very peacefully
non-violently and then over several
years time escalated to more
militancy these protests have have
happened so fast in such a compressed
manner have moved from a kind of
peaceful protest to some very militant
actions in days not years so in that
sense I don't know if it's social media
or just the rapidity of modern life but
there's a kind of urgency and quickness
to these protests that's quite different
than the long incremental protests of
students in the
1960s and and what do you think that
today's students universities and indeed
the the federal government might learn
from those 60s
protests yeah that's a question that
I've been thinking a lot about and and
been talking to a lot of people about
what one thing that's pretty obvious is
that if you as a university
administrator move very quickly to bring
police or even worst case to bring
violent police actions against demonstr
ators you tend to make a difficult
situation worse so administrators have
to be very cautious about escalating
matters because often there's a backlash
students who were not interested or were
disinterested suddenly become angry that
their fellow students their peers are
being treated in such a harsh way so
that's the lesson for administrators be
careful be cautious don't do things you
don't have to do for fear that you might
escalate things worse for students I I
think the other issue is to be very
mindful of
what's their goals I think this happened
with the anti-war protest certainly in
the United States in the 1960s and early
70s where students sometimes forgot that
the point of the exercise was to
convince others that US policy was wrong
that there had to be changes and how the
United States handled its International
responsibilities here too I sometimes
worry that students in their passions
are forgetting their goal which I I
gather would be to get their
universities to divest from supporting
Israel in any manner whatso ever and
perhaps even more importantly to change
the opinions of Americans and certainly
American policy makers so become be
considerate of what your tactics are and
what your long-term goals
are I'm looking I was looking at at a
map of the campus protest today and they
they do seem to have very much bypassed
much of the middle of the country
including your own state of of Kansas
why do you think that
is um I think there's a couple
fascinating reasons for it one uh
typically maybe this is true in Germany
and other
countries uh with disperate populations
the coasts tend to have more liberal
orientations more progressives live in
those States those are the kids parents
or the students themselves so blue
States we call them the US Democratic
leaning Progressive States California
New York Massachusetts Etc Washington
State Portland Oregon maybe those are
the natural first responders to this
kind of trouble just before this
interview though I went outside and saw
that my own campus for the first time
has a mass protest and there's a kind of
encampment growing so it's it's yeah
several days later here in the state of
Kansas a traditionally conservative
state but uh here too it's happening so
we'll see whether this spreads or if the
commencements that begin May 10th or
15th or so in most us universities tends
to dissipate students and the energy of
these protests so what do is it about
this issue do you think Israel Gaza that
seems to have lit a fire under students
do do you recall similar proest for
instance um about the uh the two Gulf
Wars certainly not though do remember
that there were eventually very large
mass protests against us intervention in
particular in Iraq uh millions of people
both in Europe and the United States
taking to the streets but those were not
Campus based they were not University
based protests here I think students are
trying to understand as was true way
back in the Vietnam War era are their
own communities are their own
universities complicit in what many of
these student protesters see as an
ill-advised or immoral even policy
toward Israel and Palestine so here in
this particular struggle there's a
campus-based reasoning going on and I
don't think that was true with the Gulf
War Wars per se or or some of the other
perhaps Misadventures of US foreign
policy in recent years you you mentioned
the the care needed when thinking about
inviting police onto campus uh back in
1968 the Colombia president Grayson Kirk
actually resigned a year after calling
in a thousand police officers to quell
student protests against the the Vietnam
War amongst other things do you think
that the current Colombia president minu
shafik will end up stepping
down right now I would say no the scale
of the protest despite the international
media attention to it is relatively SC
small in scale and I don't think that
the political environment is similar
today obviously most Americans still
very much support Israel they support
the United States's position on
supporting Israel so I I don't think
that presidents of at leite univ I ities
are fearing
Progressive impulses that would cause
them to resign it seems politically it's
the other direction we've recently had
the presidents of Harvard and the
University of Pennsylvania resigned
because of conservative pressure against
them so I I think the political contexts
are quite different in the United States
today we're in a more conservative place
maybe than we were in
1968 fascinating analysis and we thank
you for it professor professor David
Farber from Kansas University thank
thank you